__you never think your mom will die until they do__
My mom passed away two doors down from my own hospital room on May 23, 2014. I was there for a bad panic attack. She was there for diabetes-related complications. She's spent the greater part of her last year getting amputations to slow the spread of the infection which ultimately stopped her heart. 

My mom was one of the strongest people I ever knew. She birthed five children, had multiple long-lived careers, and held our family together through turbulent times. It never occurred to me that my mom's illness was serious. And I didn't realize how difficult it was for her to go to the doctor, given her 15 year career working in one. But as I drove her back and forth to doctors and lawyers, it became clear to me that my mom was not being treated well: she kept diaries of her mistreatment. The nurses and staff would dismiss her self advocacy as the cries of an overly-emotional depressed woman, though. 

Her doctors could not understand what my mother was going through. Consider this: how many doctors have you met who have had a limb amputated from illness? None of my mother's doctors were Black, either, which created a cultural divide in an of itself. I remember being angry when my mother went on dialysis. I learnt about the process of blood being flushed and refilled into the body and knew it weakened her. I saw her doing rehabilitation after each surgery and knew she was fighting as hard as she could to outlive her prognosis, a prognosis none of my siblings or I knew of until the doctors shared it with us during her last coma. Could the doctors save my mom? Maybe. But what was more glaringly obvious to me was the discrimination she faced due to her low-coverage insurance (Medicare), her status (Black hospital custodian), and her condition (according to some statistics, diabetes is more prevalent in Black communities).

There's so much I want to say now that I've had seven years to put together the words. And yet they still fail to depict how lonely she must have felt. How defeating it must've been every time she went in to seek care from some of the only people it seemed could save her, and how angry she must've felt about her own helplessness in stopping her decline. But what I will say is I get it now. Not just because of the passage of time but because of my own challenges in self advocacy as I grappled with blindness, an exceptionally rare autoimmune disease that nearly took my own life, and working with doctor after doctor who dismissed my very real physical symptoms as just "in my head". 

We need to not just do better -- we need to __be__ better. All of us. For doctors, this means looking at patients and their vitals without using outdated race-based statistics. For the rest of us it means being better at listening to each other. I think my mom would've been more at peace while she was still alive if she felt people actually gave a damn about what she was going through. We need to also be better at showing compassion. Your pain is my pain and vice versa. If we are to ever truly evolve as a species we must look out for one another. Because you don't need to walk a mile in someone else's shoes figuratively to connect with what they need and know instinctively we are all connected. Finally, we must better ourselves by intentionally taking action to improve our health. After all, healthly communities are comprised of healthy people. I've started going for walks and jogs with the hope of one day finishing another half marathon (I haven't done one since 2014). 

Reality is we will all die one day. As I get older, that fact becomes more and more apparent. But what I remember most about my mom is not who she was when she died -- I often remember who she was while she lived. What would you want someone to remember you for when you leave this earth? Even if you don't have human children, you have a legacy. The gag though is legacy isn't about "who do you want to be when you grow up?" -- it's about who do you want to be right NOW?